Song Dev Docs Update (#838)
overture-stack/SONG: docs/index.md

# Song Developer Documentation

---

**Navigation**
- [Operation](./operation/operation.md)
- [Contribution](./contribution/contribution.md) 

---

# Background

> Song is a metadata validation and tracking tool designed to streamline the management of genomics data across multiple cloud storage systems. With Song, users can create high-quality and reliable metadata repositories with minimal human intervention. As a metadata management system, Song does not handle file transfer and object storage. Song interacts with a required companion application, <a href="https://github.com/overture-stack/score" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Score</a>, which manages file transfers and object storage.

Reviewer: I think what you say here is correct but it does not clearly make the connection that Song is tracking the files you have uploaded in cloud storage system and managing the metadata associated with those files. Needs to be stated explicitly that this is about tracking files and managing their metadata.

Reviewer: I think of Song as a File Catalog, like an inventory system that tracks what files we have and the meta data about them. Not sure if that verbiage is helpful.

## Data Submission

> **Analysis Files:** An analysis is a description of a set of one or more files plus the metadata describing that collection of files.

Reviewer: The label here should just be `**Analyses:**`. We need to help clarify the distinction between an _analysis_ (collection of files and the meta data that describes them), and the _files_ themselves. I think it would help to do that if we separate the terms clearly.

> **Metadata Validation:** Analyses get validated against the administrator's Dynamic Schema. That defines the vocabulary and structure of the analysis document. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Metadata Validation:** Analyses get validated against a metadata schema that defines the vocabulary and structure of the analysis document. Song allows administrators to define custom schemas that describe the Analyses they intend to manage.
```

Not sure on the wording of my second suggested sentence... what i'm trying to do is indicate that you can define multiple schemas, one for each analysis type that you will be managing. The phrasing "the administrator's Dynamic Schema" seems to imply that the administrator only gets one custom schema

Author: Your wording here is better.

**Tracking of Metadata to File Data:** Once validated, the analysis document is stored in the Song repository and given an automated analysis ID. The analysis ID is then used when uploading all associated file data through Score. Analysis IDs associate the metadata stored in Song with the file data being transferred by score and stored in the cloud.

## Data Administration

> **Dynamic Schemas:** The data administrator creates the Dynamic Schema, which again, provides the vocabulary for the structural validation of JSON formatted data (Analysis documents), for example, ensuring that required fields are present or that the contents of a field match the desired data type or allowed values.

Reviewer: content:
- can have multiple schemas, one for each type of analysis we will be managing. 

style:
- Don't use "which again" in documentation, its ok to repeat ourselves if relevant.
- Split this point into multiple sentences or bullets, too many commas.

> **Data Lifecycle Management:** Analyses uploaded to a Song repository are `UNPUBLISHED` by default. When data is ready for search and download, administrators can make it available by updating it to a `PUBLISHED` state. If data is no longer relevant, the data administrators can set it to a `SUPPRESSED` state, making it unavailable for search and download through downstream services. 

Reviewer: I am not sure if this is the place for this detail, but, it is worth stating somewhere that an analysis can't be published unless all its associated files have been uploaded to and available with Score. This ensures that all published analyses have their files available for download through Score.

# Background

Song is a metadata validation and tracking tool designed to streamline the management of genomics data across multiple cloud storage systems. It functions as a file catalog tracking files and managing their metadata, without handling file transfer and object storage itself. Song interacts with a required companion application, [Score](https://github.com/overture-stack/score), which manages file transfers and object storage.

## Data Submission

**Analyses:** An analysis is a collection of one or more files, along with the metadata that describes this collection.

**Metadata Validation:** Analyses get validated against a metadata schema that defines the vocabulary and structure of the analysis document. Song allows administrators to define custom schemas that describe the Analyses they intend to manage.

**Tracking of Metadata to File Data:** Once validated, the analysis document is stored in the Song repository and assigned an automated analysis ID. This ID is then used when uploading all associated file data through Score. The analysis ID links the metadata stored in Song with the file data being transferred by Score and stored in the cloud.

## Data Administration

> **Dynamic Schemas:** With Song, data administrators can create Dynamic Schemas for multiple types of analyses. These schemas define the vocabulary for the structural validation of JSON formatted data.

Reviewer: Don't know if `With Song` adds any info. Can probably omit.
